### **Why are you interested in programming? What have you done to expose yourself to programming so far?**
  Technically, my introduction to coding came my senior year in high school. I was inspired by a close friend, weaned on the earliest personal computers he was in love with everything technological, and he introduced me to the languages hidden deep in the computer and its software and I was intrigued. I couldn’t help but be intrigued! My main intent in taking the basic HTML coding class was to fulfil a high school requirement for graduation, and it served that function admirably. Looking back, I can name a couple of the reasons the class failed to make a lasting impression my friend’s basic instruction had; the teacher was uninspired and distracted, and the timing was off, I was already too swept up in my plans to attend Whitman College in the fall to pay much attention to the present. 

  When I landed my job at Bluehawk Consulting after graduating from Whitman College, I at the company armed with a bachelor’s degree in Anthropology and considerable self-confidence in my critical thinking and problem-solving abilities, but with practically the minimum amount of technological understanding/capability necessary to be a modern college graduate. Initially IT wasn’t considered part of my job description, thankfully so because I hadn’t worked on a computer with a Windows operating system since the 90’s. My technological duties at Bluehawk began innocently enough, when, after a few months, I was asked to take over the management of the company’s ‘computer tracking system’: the inconsistently-updated excel spreadsheet used to keep track of the company’s 50+ computers deployed to consultants working out in the field. ‘Tracking’ became ‘purchasing and tracking’, which soon became ‘purchasing, tracking and performing tech support’ for our rapidly growing fleet of commuters and computer accessories. The company was growing fast, and my technological capabilities alongside it. It wasn’t long before I found myself curled up in the corner at the parties on the weekends, discussing the finer points of the Lenovo T series and intel’s ubiquitous line of processors. It wasn’t _all_ fun and games, there were times I cursed my inexperience, but the feeling of hard work paying off kept me motivated. After my first year at Bluehawk I was far from an IT professional, but just as far from where I had started. Practice sharpened my skills and made me more efficient, however, looking back, I can also see how it was often my outside perspective – as well as the researching skills, courtesy of Whitman - that allowed me to approach new problems with a fresh perspective, free of common preconditioned biases in the IT field.

  After we surpassed 100 computers it became glaringly clear to me that my Excel spreadsheet, while much improved, wasn’t cutting it anymore and was, in many ways, holding us back. My search for a solution was exhaustive and I spent weeks researching and interviewing our options. Ultimately, my decision was made for me by the lack of funds we could allocate. I would create the database myself, I would learn Microsoft Access through tutorials from the company’s Lynda.com account. The process was undoubtedly challenging, but I what I remember best is the fist-pumping elation of steady progress (such as when I felt when I got my first, relatively complex, custom query to work). Two weeks later I retired the Excel spreadsheet for good and began using our dynamic, new tracking system equipped with the capability to incorporate chronological record keeping integrated between two different key identifiers! Much of what was involved in creating this database couldn’t be considered programming - learning how to use the software that programmers had already coded - but there were those instances where specific customizations required me to dive into some of the lower-level coding capabilities of the software. Ultimately, it was my success in creating the database that gave me the confidence to work minor code into other elements of my job. I designed increasingly complex queries and functions in Excel, power BI and Access, gaining confidence and pleasure from testing the boundaries of my knowledge and the software’s capabilities. Instead of reengaging with our independent contractor to make the HTML changes necessary to redeploy our quarterly newsletter I made the changes myself, ultimately bringing the journey full circle back to the first programming language I ever learned.

  My favorite class I ever took at Whitman was linguistic anthropology. I credit this class with my ability to recognize the logical patterns underpinning language and the way it is used. It was this ability that convinced me I was capable of learning Access, and by extension reintroduced me to programming. As with all languages, there is a flexible, creative aspect coexisting with the calculated logic. Coding is, at its element, a form of creative writing, one with many diverse, powerful applications and an extensive audience! Its nature and ubiquity situate it perfectly as a force for enabling individuality, one that we can’t afford not to take advantage of!  It has the power to create new narratives, which we trust and act on, with a powerful potential for facilitating agency; If a space doesn’t exist it provides the tools necessary to create that space! Everyone possesses underlying conceptual frameworks and unquestioned biases which are largely invisible to them. These imperceptible assumptions are transferred into those things we have a hand in creating. The more diverse actors incorporated into the creative process, ultimately the more accessible the product will be! It is for this reason that the Anita Borg Institute’s mission statement resonated so powerfully with me; “We envision a future where the people who imagine and build technology mirror the people and societies they build it for.”  Ensuring free and easy access to information to all facets of civilization is a real passion of mine – drawn into sharp relief this past political season - and what is more emblematic of this basic human right than the collaborative discipline of coding, particularly open-source. I hope someday to use my skills and knowledge to further this cause, and enable later groups to do the same. I envision a world where we can speak for ourselves so others need not do it for us!

### **If you are accepted into our program, where do you see your career in 5 years?**
  
  To single my sights on one path at such an early stage would be a mistake, and only serve to limit me. I am only beginning to understand how many opportunities are available for a passionate, flexible, determined software developer. The designer in me is drawn to front-end development, while the linguistic logic of back-end development resonates with another part of me discovered during college. My limited exposure to the discipline might leave the specifics of my future vague, but the past few years have served to clarify other - arguably more important - aspects of myself. If I leave Bluehawk with one thing, it is a well-developed understanding of the type of worker I have the determination to become, and the type of company and community that will be able to get me there. 

  I know now that I what truly allows me to thrive at work is working at a place of business that holds the same values; an honest, collaborative, positive space that values innovation and the free flow of communication.  I try to be very deliberate in the types of establishments I patron and in the long-term I see myself working at a place that I hold in the same regard. I have learned that what I find truly fulfilling is having the opportunity to contribute to something bigger than myself. Seattle can be an expensive city, but I have learned how to live a good life thriftily and what truly sustains me is knowing that I am living a life that is contributing in a positive way to my community. I have no trouble putting in the hours, especially at the beginning, to excel and advance in my career. but eventually I hope to find a work/life balance that allows me to volunteer, lending my programming skills or in some cases just a strong back to the causes I am especially passionate about – local animal rescue efforts, political campaigns, mentorship in public schools/the public library/other non-profits concerned with the free flow of knowledge. I have been a Seattle resident for over 20 years now, and I have seen firsthand the changes this city has undergone, many at the hands of the budding tech industry in the area, and I relish the continued opportunity to have a say in shaping the place I love! 

### **After reading Ada's Vision, Mission and Inclusivity Statement, how will you contribute to Ada's vision for an inclusive and diverse community?**
 
  Working adjacent the tech industry these past few years, I have seen firsthand the underrepresentation of skilled software developers in the Puget sound region. I will admit that - in addition to the reasons I gave above - I am interested in programming in part because, especially coming from a liberal arts college, I like the prospect of possessing skills that I wouldn’t have to sell the value of to a potential employer. I love the doors it could open to me to be part of so many diverse industries as well as the possibility for flexibility/personalization it affords. My quiet spark of excitement at the prospect of learning software development was enough to initially draw me to your website, and the more I learn about Ada the larger and warmer that spark has grown. Truly, it was your emphasis on building a supportive and positive community and your mission to create driven, well-rounded software developers that sold me, and the more research I did, the more I realized how unique at place Ada is. Supportive, inclusive communities provide their members with power, resolve, and resources outside that of their own individual capabilities. Thanks to Bluehawk, I know I am capable of self-motivated and self-directed skill growth when necessary, however I also know enough about how I learn to realize that it is through the support of a community such as Ada that I have the chance to become the best programmer I can be. 
 
  As I’ve aged, my understanding of diversity has complexified. My time at Whitman went a long way in helping me evolve my sense of self and appreciate the positive and nuanced ways in which I can contribute to the diversity of my community. However, as a white, middle-class, cis-gendered (straight), woman I’ve still never truly felt that the word diversity belonged to me. Unfortunately, this past political cycle served to shock me out of some of my comfortable complacence, it made me appreciate how little I can afford to take for granted. Women might make up 50-51% of the globe (and an even higher percentage of college graduates) but in many ways, we are still fighting for the right to control our own narratives. This is especially true in the tech industry, and its having tangible repercussions; from unconcealed sexual harassment - such as the lawsuit filed by the Tinder co-founder or the recent Uber suit - to less overt conditioned biases, such as the perceptions of many ambitious women as aggressive and bossy. I would relish the opportunity to be a part of a community helping to diversify the unfortunately analogous tech world. I use the word community purposefully here, because I believe that is the _key_ to not only getting more women into the STEM fields, but keeping there!

  My natural-born proclivity for empathizing was helpful while learning Anthropology, I was easily able to put myself in the shoes of others and translate their experiences – best anyone can - into universal words. I believe that this same characteristic is what will make me a valuable, engaged member of the Ada community. And I hope to move past empathizing, to give back to the community which shapes and strengthens me. Personally, I don’t dream of a future with children, instead, I fantasize of one where my struggles useful to young women in my same shoes down the road. I have experienced firsthand the vast, positive impact that an invested teacher or family friend can make on a young person’s life, and I can’t think of much more fulfilling than having that kind of positive impact on another! 

### **Tell us about a time you made a mistake that you learned a lot from. If you encountered the situation again, what would you do differently?**
 
 I have been at Bluehawk Consulting for two and a half years, many would consider that an achievement, and in some ways I do, but in other ways I consider it a mistake. I am thankful that my “mistake” is a work in progress; that what I am doing differently **now**, is the answer to what I will need to do differently in the future.  

 I have been unhappy at my place of employment going on about a year now. But this was my first job after college and I wanted so desperately to succeed, which I saw as being able to ‘stick it out’ and make the best of what I was given. I mistook my suffering for grit and determination, unable to recognize the different between constructive challenges and destructive once. But what is grit if it’s not for the cause of change and growth. And the unfortunate truth is that, after about a year at Bluehawk, I had become stagnant with no more room to grow. I fought hard against the deterioration of my most prized, hard-won traits; my strong work ethic, moral compass, and perceptive problem solving abilities. I felt like I was losing control, both at work and outside of it, and soon I found myself sitting on the floor of the darkened server room at least once a week, having to remind myself how to breathe. 

 I hadn’t even realized how much I had isolated myself until I made the decision about six months ago to finally asked for help. Slowly but surely I built a community back around me that helped me to help myself. I worked with therapists and doctors to approach my problems from the psychological and physiological side, and I even talked with my boss about what we could both modify to make things work better. I was able to accept that my loss of passion and drive weren’t personal failures born of inherent flaws, but instead of my circumstance. I had not lost those skills which gave me the grit to succeed at college, I simply wasn’t in a place they could shine.

 The last 6 months have been painful; however, I cannot bring myself to regret any of my tenure at Bluehawk because it has been one of the most valuable periods in my life for the self-discovery it has produced. I turned myself around through the recognizing what I was doing wrong and subsequently modifying. This will be a lifelong process of discovery and adjustment, it is a given I will have more hard times in the future, but I am optimistic because I am confident that next time the tools and knowledge I acquired in the past few months will be immeasurably helpful. Next time, I’ll know to be wary of getting too comfortable, because I realize now how necessary a little struggle in my life is for me to be happy and productive. I will remember to foster a community with whom I share experience but who can help me to see them with a fresh perspective. But most importantly of all I will listen to myself, and trust that I can recognize when the struggle is productive, helping me to grow personally and professionally, and when it is not, allow myself to course correct and have faith in my ability to persevere. 

